Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger. Today, we're
gonna do something rather interesting. We're going
to take this particle-antiparticle symmetry
that comes from physics and extend it into
mathematics. This is going to be essential for
us to be able to use the multiset framework
consistently across the board to set up linear
algebra, field theory, and other things as well,
including group theory later on. So, in some
ways, what we're going to do now will appear
like a game, and you can think about it that
way. It's a kind of a technical device that
we're going to introduce that allows us to make
sense of things that we want to write down,
but because we're obligated to be very precise
about what things actually mean, we actually
have to identify the objects that correspond
to the things that we want to write down.
So the story is motivated by this remarkable
discovery of 20th-century physics, going back
to essentially Dirac around 1930, that there was
some kind of strange antiparticle for an electron,
which subsequently was called a positron. And
then eventually, physicists realized this was
not some kind of isolated occurrence, but was
rather a manifestation of some kind of general
symmetry—that basically every elementary
particle has an associated antiparticle
with roughly the same mass but opposite charges.
So not only do we have an electron and positron,
but we have a proton and an antiproton,
a neutron and antineutron, a neutrino and
antineutrino, an up quark and an anti-up quark,
and so on. Generally, the convention that the
physicists like to use is that if the particle is
denoted by a b, then the antiparticle is denoted
with a b with a bar over it. So there's at least
theoretically some kind of symmetry between these
particles and antiparticles that was discovered
by physicists, and now I think they have a kind
of reasonable explanation for why this one goes
across the board. That's very interesting, and
we're going to take on board a little bit of that
understanding from the 20th-century physicists.
So to motivate this, let's recall that one of the
important things that numbers do for us is that
they allow us to scale existing data structures.
That means that we can multiply, say, M-sets by
numbers. So, for example, here is a rather general
M-set. So I'm not being very specific about what
objects are in here; these could be any kind of
mathematical objects as long as we've already
had a prior definition of what they are. We'll
just represent them as some kind of objects,
say heart, heart, diamond. And we want to take
this M-set and we want to multiply it by two.
So here is the number two represented by our two
little marks, okay? And we know how to do that:
we multiply each one of these marks by each one
of these things. And the basic rule here is that,
well, mark times a heart is a heart. So we
have a heart, and then we offer another heart,
and then we go to this one heart and another
heart, and then a diamond and another diamond. And
so that's the way we multiply this M-set by this
number. And a special case is what happens when
we multiply the same M-set by the number zero or
the empty M-set. Well, in this case, there's a lot
of products of the form emptiness or nothing times
something, and nothing times something is nothing,
so we get nothing on the right-hand side. So we
get the empty set again. So this empty set is
playing a very generic role here. It's really just
the empty, I should say, empty multiset. It's the
empty multiset, which can be a number, can be
a natural number, it can be a negative number,
it can be an integer. We can even think about it
as being a type of M-set of pixels or Maxwells,
and so on. So it's a rather general kind of thing
that plays its role in many different situations.
So now we know how to define n times A if n is
a natural number and A is an M-set, and there's
a pleasant algebra. Okay, now we want to ask
this question, this natural extension: How do we
multiply an M-set by a negative number? How does
that work? Well, it all comes down to specifying
what happens when we multiply some generic object
by each of our three basic ingredients of numbers,
namely the mark, emptiness, and the anti-mark.
And we've already convinced ourselves that the
mark times, say, heart ought to be heart, and
that nothing times heart ought to be nothing. So
now the question is, what should anti-mark times
heart be? Let's temporarily call it heart-bar. So
we're going to introduce possibly a new kind of
object called heart-bar, which is the result of
taking a little anti-mark and multiplying it by
heart, okay? These three rules will then tell us
how to multiply our basic elements with a general
generic object, and that will then allow us to
extend our multiplication of numbers times M-sets
to a very general situation. We'll now be able to
multiply any number, be it a negative number
or a natural number, by an arbitrary M-set.
Okay, so what about this new object that we're
introducing? Well, it has to have a very special
property. So we require that this new object,
heart-bar, has the property that it cancels with
heart—that heart together with heart-bar gives
us nothing. And this is an equation that has to
happen inside an M-set. So, you know, if we have
an M-set and it contains a heart somewhere and it
also contains a heart-bar or an anti-heart,
then those two things are going to cancel,
just the way a neutron and an antineutron cancel,
and the result is nothing. So that's the property
that this new object has to have, that it has
to cancel with this one. And why is that? Well,
the reason is the following: that
if we take zero times an M-set,
we should get zero or the empty M-set. And so
if you take the empty M-set and we multiply,
say, by the single M-set containing just a heart,
whatever that might be, then we know we should get
an empty M-set. But we also know that this empty
M-set, or the number zero, is in some sense the
same as the M-set consisting of a mark and an
anti-mark together, because we know that that
mark and the anti-mark cancel to give us emptiness
or nothing. So what would happen if we consider
this product here by the usual rule? So we just
multiply the mark times a heart—there it is—and
we multiply the anti-mark times a heart. Now we
know that the mark times a heart is heart, and so,
well, we're going to get this new M-set is heart,
and the other one is anti-mark times heart. Now
this supposedly is going to be the empty M-set, so
for this to work, we require that this new object,
anti-mark times heart, which is what we're calling
heart-bar or anti-heart, that that object has the
property, this cancellation property, that when
we have a heart and this anti-heart together,
they better cancel to give us the empty
M-set. In other words, inside the M-set,
we want this crucial cancellation
that heart times heart-bar is nothing.
So we're really proposing something
that's quite dramatically new here,
even though it's a little bit formal and technical
and maybe so out of the vision most of the time.
But nevertheless, theoretically, it really changes
the landscape of mathematics. So I remind you that
our basic premise is that we are going to build
up mathematical objects from the bottom up, right?
That's our basic orientation. We're starting at
the bottom, not already assuming all kinds of
stuff, and we're building things up step by step,
one at a time, and going from simpler structures
to more complicated structures to more complicated
structures. And now what we're proposing is that
we're going to have this general orientation
that for any bona fide mathematical object,
heart—so, some process in this building up, we
get some object that we're very comfortable with,
let's call it heart—okay, that we're going
to propose that there is another object,
kind of a mirror object, actually an
anti-object that corresponds to that,
that object, which is its anti-object. In
other words, there's going to be a new object,
heart-bar, which we can define as the anti-mark
times the heart that we're considering,
that has this crucial cancellation
property that we've seen several times.
So we want this to be true across the board
in the same way as the particle-antiparticle
duality works across the board for elementary
physics. It's not just electron and positron
or proton and antiproton. This is a general
kind of symmetry that's going to apply to
any kind of legitimate mathematical
object that we're able to construct.
And some definition or terminology: So, let's
say if the object that we're considering happens
to be the object called heart, then we'll
call this thing here anti-heart and we'll
say that anti-heart is the anti of heart.
So I'm introducing this usage of this word
in a slightly different way. So this is
supposed to be similar to the use of the
word opposite—the opposite of black is white,
the opposite of day is night. Now we're going
to talk about the anti of a mathematical
object, heart, as being this thing here,
anti-heart, or we'll say heart-bar when we're
sort of talking about how we write it down. So
the anti of a mark is the anti-mark. The anti
of the anti-mark—how do we get that? Well,
the definition is always the same: the
anti of something is what you get when
you take the anti-mark and multiply
it by that something. In this case,
we know what we get. We take the anti-mark and
we multiply it by the anti-mark. Anti-mark times
anti-mark—we've decided already that that's going
to be the mark. So this crucial property that the
anti of the anti-mark is just the mark. So I do
admit that this takes some getting used to, may
take a little while for this to sort of sink into
our consciousness, but it's pretty interesting,
and we'll see that it's really essential to be
able to do the kinds of things that we want to do.
So what is this anti of something? Is the anti
of a number just its negative? No, it's not,
okay? The anti of a number is not its negative.
The anti of a number is a new kind of object. So,
for example, here is the number that we
usually call four. It's an M-set with mark,
mark, mark, mark in it. It's a natural number.
So the anti of this thing, what is it? Well,
this is a mathematical object, and its
anti is what you get when you multiply
it by anti-mark. And by definition, that's
just a new object that has a bar over it,
okay? So, as if we really do anything, we just
take that object and we put a bar over it,
and then it's some new object, the anti of what
we had previously. So there's the object here,
and notice that the bar goes right over all of it.
So we're taking the bar over the whole thing, and
if we were going to write this as a hint of Arabic
numeral four, then we would just write four-bar.
And what kind of a new thing is this? Well, it
makes sense to say that the type of this thing is
anti-net. This is a net, so this is an anti-net.
And what property does this have? Well, if we
take an M-set consisting of this and four-bar,
there's four, and there's four-bar or anti-four,
then those two things are going to cancel. That's
the basic cancellation, and I'm going to get
the empty set or zero. On the other hand, minus
four, okay, minus four also involves anti-things,
but minus four was the M-set consisting of four
anti-marks—anti-mark, anti-mark, anti-mark,
anti-mark. That's a negative number. That's
actually quite different. So this is different
from this. If you like, here the bar extends over
the whole thing, and here we're just having the
individual elements inside the M-set being barred.
So this is not equal to this; they're different.
So, for example, if we make an M-set containing
the number four and the number minus four,
then we're not going to get zero; we're not
going to get the empty M-set because these
two things don't cancel themselves out as
objects. This is now a new M-set which has
two elements in it. One of the elements is
four, and the other element is minus four,
and that's just what it is. It doesn't
simplify to anything simpler. But if you
have four and anti-four, you are obliged
to cancel those object pairs and simplify.
So let me give you some motivation for why
we want to do this. Anti-objects allow us
to introduce negative numbers into vexels and
maxels. Here, for example, is a vexel. It is
an M-set consisting of singletons: the singleton
two, the singleton zero, the singleton minus one,
the singleton one, the singleton one. And so
these are singletons from integers. That means
they are lists whose elements are integers—just
a list with one element. And we know that we can
represent this kind of thing in a sort of vector
form by recording the number of zeros we have,
the number of ones we have, and the number of
minus ones we have. We can write this down in
a freeze kind of fashion like that, with this
convention that the zero spot is identified by
some bar, so we know where it's sort of centered.
Here's another kind of vexel, but now this is a
new kind of object because it has not just
singletons, but also some anti-singletons.
So let's try to get our heads around this,
okay? What do we see in this M-set? Well,
how about zero singletons? How many
zero singletons are there here? Well,
there is not really ten singletons;
there's minus one singleton because
this anti-singleton zero counts as minus
one of them. That's what we're going to do;
we're going to interpret this anti-object as
minus one of the original object. So we see
that there's one anti-singleton zero here,
so we're going to record that by putting
a minus one in the zero spot. In terms of
minus one singletons, there's two of them,
so we'll put a two in the minus one spot. And
also, in the two spot, up here is a singleton two,
only one of them, so we'll put a one there. But in
the singleton one spot, we have singleton one-bar,
singleton one-bar—that corresponds to minus two
singleton ones. So we would put a minus two there.
So let me try to convince you that this
actually makes sense, that this is consistent,
this is logical. Because suppose you wanted to add
these two vectors, okay? These are M-sets, so we
know how to add M-sets. We just put them together.
So V + W, so we take all of these elements, just
put them in there, and then we add all of these
elements, starting from here. There we go. Okay,
now we have this big M-set. And now we look at
it and say, "Well, wait a minute, there is a
singleton zero here and there is its anti-object."
Like, there's the anti of this. So this thing and
this thing cancel—poof, they're gone, replaced
with nothing. And now there's only this singleton
zero left. How about minus ones? Well, there's one
minus one singleton there, and there's another one
there, another one there, so altogether there's
three of them. How about the one singletons? So
there's one here, one here, and one here,
but here there's an anti on one of these,
and here there's another anti on one of these.
So this anti cancels with one of these; we don't
really care which one—this one here—they cancel.
This one cancels with another one—say, that one
there—and we're left with a single singleton one.
And the singleton two is alone, finds over there,
it's just there. And then when we count what we
have left over, well, we have one singleton zero,
we have three singleton minus ones, and we have
singleton one and a singleton two. And we see
that this is indeed what we expect in terms
of component-wise addition of these vectors
over here. So there's a zero spot, so two plus
minus one is indeed one. One plus two is three,
three plus minus two is one, zero plus one is one.
So these minus ones here are representing these
anti-objects, and they add to the original objects
in the right way; namely, they cancel with them
in the multiset, so we get the correct additive
structure on the vector side of things. The price
we pay is that in order to have minus ones,
where we want to interpret those minus ones
as multiplicities, we're going to interpret
them as being multiplicities of anti-objects.
I guess it goes back to, you know, the question,
what is minus three cows? What does it mean to
take four cows and add minus three cows? Well,
it's hard to do that physically. You have to
imagine a minus cow, some kind of fictitious
object representing some debt. It's not really the
same as a tangible physical cow, but it's a debt,
it's some kind of virtual object. That's sort of
what we're doing here; we're being more precise
about these virtual objects and giving them
names and these bars over them. Basically,
we're doing the same kind of thing: four
cows plus minus three cows gives us one cow,
four objects plus three anti-objects give
us one object of that particular kind.
So here's another example of how we can use this
concept for something that's very important for
us, which is to develop maxel theory in a kind of
a very good arithmetic way. So here's an example
of a new kind of maxel. It's got pixels in it, but
some of the pixels are kind of anti-pixels instead
of regular pixels. So we have minus one, two, and
there's a couple of them. We have a zero, one,
but that's an anti-object at zero, two of them.
And we have three of these anti-one, one pixels,
okay? So this is a maxel with both pixels and
what we might call anti-pixels. Obvious what we
mean by that, right? That's an anti-pixel,
that's a pixel, okay? And we can represent
this thing now, and here's our integer screen, a
representation where we have our lines like this.
There prominently in the middle is our zero,
zero spot. That's the basic reference frame,
okay? So we would put multiplicities here.
So minus one, two—that's minus one, two. So
that two there represents these two fellows here.
This zero, one—so the zero, one is that position,
but we don't have one of them; we have basically
minus one of them because there's an anti-zero,
one pixel there, not a regular zero, one pixel.
So we put a minus one there; that minus one is
a representation of the fact that we have an
anti-pixel there. We have two of these pixels,
the zero, two pixels, so we put two there,
and then we have three of these anti-pixels,
so we put a minus three in the one, one position.
So this is a representation of this M-set which
contains both pixels and anti-pixels now.
And it's very important for us to be able
to do this because we want to do arithmetic with
maxels, but we for sure want to have integers in
the maxel positions. So we basically want to
do standard linear algebra; we don't want to
just restrict ourselves to natural number
entries in all our matrices and maxels,
because we are always thinking in terms of them
as being M-sets, and if they were M-sets, then the
multiplicities would always have to be positive.
So we want to free ourselves from that. That's
exactly what we've done. We've enlarged our point
of view, admittedly by introducing these strange
new anti-objects, but now we're in a position to
interpret very precisely what something like this
means in a multiset framework. So these numbers
are still representing multiplicities of objects.
Now, in certain areas of mathematics, somewhat
more sophisticated mathematics, negative numbers
of objects are introduced by what are sometimes
referred to as formal linear combinations. So,
for example, in group theory, maybe you have a
group, a finite group, and it has elements g1,
g2, g3, g4, and so on. In some situations, it's
useful to consider linear combinations of these
things. For example, we like to do arithmetic
with combinations like 3g1 - 2g2 + 2g3, and it's
a legitimate question to ask, what exactly are we
talking about here? And in traditional algebra,
there's a little bit of dodging and weaving when
it comes to saying exactly how one sets up such
formal combinations. One usually does something
like this as well: we're considering some formal
combination, and so on. So what we're doing here
is trying to be more precise about what's really
going on when we consider a formal object like
this. What we're proposing here is that this
thing here is really probably living in a multiset
framework, okay? We're talking about a multiset,
really, that's what this represents,
where there are three g1's, a single g3,
and two anti-g2's. If we have a notion of an
anti-object, that makes perfect sense, and then
we have a consistent multiset interpretation of
this kind of formal combination that's going to
be useful in quite a lot of contexts. So this
object-anti-object setup is an alternative to
some more loose kind of discussion that one
often finds in advanced algebra courses.
Now, a curious aspect of the
20th-century physicists' understanding of
particle-antiparticles is that although there's
this theoretical symmetry, practically, if you
look out there in the real world, you do not see
a symmetry between particles and antiparticles.
Pretty well everything in our ordinary world
consists of just particles, and the antiparticles
of things in our world are very hard to find.
That's why they weren't observed until 1930. So
there's definitely an asymmetry with regard to
the prevalence of particles and antiparticles,
at least in this neck of the woods where we are
here in our universe. Okay, so similarly, we're
going to find that we're going to use anti-objects
rather minimally. It's not as if now, suddenly,
our mathematics is going to be populated by all
kinds of anti-things. Rather, this is a sort of
technical device that allows us to justify putting
negative numbers in lists that are multiplicity
lists for M-sets. So it's a way of still doing our
arithmetic but in a more general way, you know,
in a kind of formally correct way. Because we're
going to be rather general about being able to
take an anti of something, it might be that
the objects like heart that we're considering
might be actually quite long objects. We could be
considering an M-set with three thousand things,
and we might want to take its anti. So we will
use this notation that anti-mark times heart
is heart-bar, with the bar right over the heart.
But sometimes we will also allow ourselves this
alternate usage where we put the little bar to
the right, almost like an index, okay? So imagine
if this is some big M-set that's very long; we'll
just stick the bar at the end, sort of over at the
end of the final bracket, just so we don't have
to write some big overline. So, for example, here,
this is an M-set. It's actually a maxel, it's got
three pixels. So it's possible for us to consider
the anti of a maxel, and instead of writing
this, we could alternately just write the maxel
with a prominent bar at the end on the right as an
index there. So that means the anti of this maxel.
So in our next video, I do want to say a
little bit more about this anti operation.
It's obviously a kind of a novel and interesting
thing, and there's a few more things to say about
it. And then after that, we'll get on
to some very interesting applications to
setting up field theory and higher arithmetic,
really from the maxel point of view. But next
time, a little bit more about this curious
anti operation that we've now introduced into
mathematics. Hope you'll join me for that. I'm
going Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.